---
layout: post
title: "Hypothesis- or data-driven research?"
---

Hello everybody, today marks the start of the spring according to the Chinese Lunar calendar. What a great day to celebrate the commencement of a new season! I wish you are seeing the changes all around you already.

Before we start, let's consider a hypothetical scenario: we're on a mission to locate a treasure island somewhere in the the Pacific. Some propose to send fleets to every corner of the ocean. *"As long as we cover the region well, we will find it in the end..."* Others maintain that we'd better gather some high-quality intelligence on where about the island might be first, then target on selected areas for in-depth search. As the chief of the mission, which strategy would you rather have? Maybe, you should at least get hold of a map!

Yes, you guessed right! Today, we are going to have a discussion on the two schools of thought concerning strategy to biomedical research: the rational/hypothesis-driven approach and the increasingly popular empirical/data-driven approach. To many, rational design in research might seem old-fashioned or even obsolete nowadays, if you think about all the international consortia hitting the headlines in the last two decades: the Human Genome Project, the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE), Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx), the UK Biobank, the 1000 Genome Project (as well as the ongoing 100,000 Genomes Project), the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG), the Human Cell Atlas, and the latest Cancer Dependency Map, etc. Yep, the fad of **"Big-Data Science"** is sweeping through almost all areas of biomedical research right now! Empirical research is gaining momentum. 

Entrenched in the idea of the **Gene**, the herculean effort behind these consortia aims to achieve one goal: to map out the "Pacific Ocean" (the Genome) for the "treasure island", i.e., the causes of physiological phenomena or pathophysiological conditions. In other words, assuming that a gene or gene derivative explains the biology, as long as we gather sufficient empirical data about the biological system, we are bound to solve all biological puzzles.

Exciting as it sounds, but is it all worth the money and resources? Surely, these consortia costs billions of dollars each year and ask for substantial manpower to deliever the job. Looking back at the earlier projects, we did learned a lot from them. For instance, now we have a reference human genome! However, the limitations are also plain to see. Have we cured cancer yet? 

What if we started all too naive? Even if our technology in biomedical research has improved tremendously over the last three decades, it might still fall short when it comes to search a vast space like the dynamic Genome. [**Insufficiency**]

What if we have the wrong tool? Big-data science is built primarily on statistical modeling, which is a bookend method of inquiry, linking two entities but revealing no causal relationship in between. In addition, among other flaws, the process of high-dimensional correlation is guaranteed to generate [false positives](http://tylervigen.com/spurious-correlations). [**Lack of Causality**]

What if we have mistaken the objective? The gene-centric ideal of biology can be viewed as a theory about the nature of the "treasure island" we are looking for. This theory assumes the island is on the surface of the ocean, identifiable by inspecting a 2D map of extraodianry resolution. Be aware, this assumption can be very misleading. What if the "treasure" is actually in the bottom of the sea? In that case, we'd better have a 3D map! [**The Missing Dimensions**]

This discussion might sound absurd to students from the department of philosophy, as empiricim is long dead there and rejected by philosophers of science. Nevertheless, in their own words, "the zombies of naive empiricism are stalking the corridors of biology and medicine departments". 

As a cancer biologist, I wish my opinions can spark some useful thoughts. 







