---
layout: post
title: "On giving an effective talk"
---

Lately, I have been preparing for a research talk I am going to give to an audience of scientific background (see details [here](https://lingyunxiong.github.io/2021/01/28/talk.html)). I thought this would be a smooth process, since I have given plenty of talks during Graduate School. However, when I presented to my mentor today, it was a total fiasco. Wanna know why? Rean on. 

Naturally, I gathered all the contents it requires to tell a full story. Since the first year of Graduate School, I have been taught to script and rehearse my speech. I thought that was **the way** to give a good talk, so I followed suit. 

But I was so wrong! Honestly, my mentor found my presentation hard to bear and would rather check the CNN, because I wasn't "talking to him". In reality, not only was scripting a malpractice in public speaking, it also has the opposite effect of turning your audience away. What's the point of giving a talk that bore people off the topic? 

I later learned that there is a big difference between written language and oral language. Due to scripting and possibly over-rehearsing, I wasn't "telling" a story at all, but merely reading out sentences, one after another. Apparently, this is something I need to avoid if I want to convey meself effectively. I only wish I had known better! 

In summary, besides the contents, the way we organize and present the contents are also crucial for effective communications. This is particularly important if the subject of matter is highly specialized. 

To deliver an effective speech and to get the message cross, now I need to go back and figure out how to speak to another person! What do you think? 







